# Day 22: Slam Shuffle - [Code](22b.ts)
There isn't much to do while you wait for the droids to repair your ship. At least you're drifting in the right direction. You decide to practice a new card shuffle you've been working on.

Digging through the ship's storage, you find a deck of **space cards**! Just like any deck of space cards, there are `10007` cards in the deck numbered `0` through `10006`. The deck must be new - they're still in factory order, with `0` on the top, then `1`, then `2`, and so on, all the way through to `10006` on the bottom.

You've been practicing three different techniques that you use while shuffling. Suppose you have a deck of only 10 cards (numbered `0` through `9`):

To **deal into new stack**, create a new stack of cards by dealing the top card of the deck onto the top of the new stack repeatedly until you run out of cards:
```
Top          Bottom
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
                      New stack

  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
                  0   New stack

    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
                1 0   New stack

      3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
              2 1 0   New stack

Several steps later...

                  9   Your deck
  8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0   New stack

                      Your deck
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0   New stack
```

Finally, pick up the new stack you've just created and use it as the deck for the next technique.

To **cut N cards**, take the top `N` cards off the top of the deck and move them as a single unit to the bottom of the deck, retaining their order. For example, to `cut 3`:

```
Top          Bottom
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck

      3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 1 2                 Cut cards

3 4 5 6 7 8 9         Your deck
              0 1 2   Cut cards

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2   Your deck
```

You've also been getting pretty good at a version of this technique where `N` is *negative*! In that case, cut (the absolute value of) `N` cards from the bottom of the deck onto the top. For example, to `cut -4`:

```
Top          Bottom
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck

0 1 2 3 4 5           Your deck
            6 7 8 9   Cut cards

        0 1 2 3 4 5   Your deck
6 7 8 9               Cut cards

6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5   Your deck
```

To **deal with increment N**, start by clearing enough space on your table to lay out all of the cards individually in a long line. Deal the top card into the leftmost position. Then, move `N` positions to the right and deal the next card there. If you would move into a position past the end of the space on your table, wrap around and keep counting from the leftmost card again. Continue this process until you run out of cards.

For example, to deal with `increment 3`:

```
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
. . . . . . . . . .   Space on table
^                     Current position

Deal the top card to the current position:

  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . . . . . . . . .   Space on table
^                     Current position

Move the current position right 3:

  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . . . . . . . . .   Space on table
      ^               Current position

Deal the top card:

    2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . . 1 . . . . . .   Space on table
      ^               Current position

Move right 3 and deal:

      3 4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . . 1 . . 2 . . .   Space on table
            ^         Current position

Move right 3 and deal:

        4 5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . . 1 . . 2 . . 3   Space on table
                  ^   Current position

Move right 3, wrapping around, and deal:

          5 6 7 8 9   Your deck
0 . 4 1 . . 2 . . 3   Space on table
    ^                 Current position

And so on:

0 7 4 1 8 5 2 9 6 3   Space on table
```

Positions on the table which already contain cards are still counted; they're not skipped. Of course, this technique is carefully designed so it will never put two cards in the same position or leave a position empty.

Finally, collect the cards on the table so that the leftmost card ends up at the top of your deck, the card to its right ends up just below the top card, and so on, until the rightmost card ends up at the bottom of the deck.

The complete shuffle process (your puzzle input) consists of applying many of these techniques. Here are some examples that combine techniques; they all start with a factory order deck of 10 cards:

```
deal with increment 7
deal into new stack
deal into new stack
Result: 0 3 6 9 2 5 8 1 4 7
```
```
cut 6
deal with increment 7
deal into new stack
Result: 3 0 7 4 1 8 5 2 9 6
```
```
deal with increment 7
deal with increment 9
cut -2
Result: 6 3 0 7 4 1 8 5 2 9
```
```
deal into new stack
cut -2
deal with increment 7
cut 8
cut -4
deal with increment 7
cut 3
deal with increment 9
deal with increment 3
cut -1
Result: 9 2 5 8 1 4 7 0 3 6
```

Positions within the deck count from 0 at the top, then 1 for the card immediately below the top card, and so on to the bottom. (That is, cards start in the position matching their number.)

### Part 2
After a while, you realize your shuffling skill won't improve much more with merely a single deck of cards. You ask every 3D printer on the ship to make you some more cards while you check on the ship repairs. While reviewing the work the droids have finished so far, you think you see Halley's Comet fly past!

When you get back, you discover that the 3D printers have combined their power to create for you a single, giant, brand new, factory order deck of `119315717514047` space cards.

Finally, a deck of cards worthy of shuffling!

You decide to apply your complete shuffle process (your puzzle input) to the deck `101741582076661` times in a row.

You'll need to be careful, though - one wrong move with this many cards and you might overflow your entire ship!

After shuffling your new, giant, factory order deck that many times, **what number is on the card that ends up in position `2020`**?

## Solution

## Appendix
### Modular Arithmetic Introduction
Topics included:
* Terminology
* Modulo operator identities
* Fermat's Little Theorem
* Exponentiation by squaring

#### Introduction
If you're new to the world of competitive programming, you may have noticed that some questions, typically combinatorial and probability questions, have this funny habit of asking you to calculate a huge number, then tell you that "because this number can be huge, please output it modulo $10^9+7^n$". Like, it's not enough that they ask you to calculate a number they know will overflow basic integer data types, but now you need to apply the modulo operation after that? Even worse are those that say you need to calculate a fraction $\frac{p}{q}$ and ask you to output $x$ where $qx\equiv p\;\;(\text{mod}\;m)$... not only do you have to calculate a fraction with huge numbers, how in the world are you going to find **x**?

#### Terminology and Notation
$n\;\text{mod}\;m$ (for itnegers `n` and `m`) to always produce an integer between `0` and `m-1` inclusively. This may or may not correspond to the expression `n % m` (**In Javascript, it does not correspond!**) `%` in Javascript is more like the *remainder operator*.

If your programming langauge returns `-8 % 7 == 6`, you're set. If it returns `-1`, you need to adjust it by adding `m` to any negative results. You can fix this in Javascript by doing

```javascript
Number.prototype.mod = function(n) {
    return ((this % n) + n) % n;
};
```

Now you can replace all the `x % y` references with `x.mod(y)`.

##### Order of Operations
The **mod** operator has the lowest precedence (lower than addition and subtraction), but Javascript does not. Thus,

$$ax+b\mod{m}\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;(ax+b)\mod{m}$$

Again, this doesn't correspond with the precedence of the `%` operator.

##### The Triple Bar Equals (≡)
This is a **congruent** statement. When you see $expr_1\equiv expr_2\;\;(\text{mod}\;m)$, it reads that `expr1` is *congruent* to `expr2` in modulo `m`. I.e., it's a shortcut for:

$$expr_1\equiv expr_2\;\;(\text{mod}\;m)\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;expr_1\;\text{mod}\;m=expr_2\;\text{mod}\;m$$

#### Operator Identities

$$
{\displaystyle
    {\begin{array}{lll}
    (a\;\;\text{mod}\;m)+(b\;\;\text{mod}\;m)\;\;\text{mod}\;m& =& a+b\;\;\text{mod}\;m\\
    (a\;\;\text{mod}\;m)-(b\;\;\text{mod}\;m)\;\;\text{mod}\;m& =& a-b\;\;\text{mod}\;m\\
    (a\;\;\text{mod}\;m)\;\cdot\;(b\;\;\text{mod}\;m)\;\;\text{mod}\;m& =& a\;\cdot\; b\;\;\text{mod}\;m
    \end{array}}
}
$$

But what about division and fractions? That's slightly more complicated, and requires a concept called the **modular multiplicative inverse**. The modular multiplicative inverse of a number `a` is the number $a^{-1}$ such that $a\cdot a^{-1}\;\;\text{mod}\;m=1$. You may notice that this is similar to the concept of a reciprocal, but here we don't want a fraction; we want an integer, specifically an integer between `0` and `m−1` inclusive.

How do you find such a number? Two fast ways to calculate the inverse:
* The extended GCD algorithm, and
* Fermat's Little Theorem

Though the extended GCD algorithm is more versatile and sometimes slightly faster, the Fermat's little theorem method is more popular.

#### Fermat's Little Theorem (FLT)
The purpose of FLT is to find the multiplicative inverse of `a` in `mod m`. I.e., find the value of `x` such that

$$ax\equiv 1\mod{m}\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;x=a^{-1}$$

This allows us to solve equations like $ax=b\mod{m}$ by doing

$$ax\cdot a^{-1}=b\cdot a^{-1}\mod{m}\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;x=b\cdot a^{-1}\mod{m}$$

Or if you have to solve something like this:

$$x=\frac{p}{q}\mod{m}\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;x=p\cdot q^{-1}\mod{m}$$

FLT says that as long as the modulus `m` is a **prime number**, then

$$a^m\;\text{mod}\;m=a\;\text{mod}\;m$$

If $a^m$ results in $a$, then $a^{m-1}$ must result in **`1`**! Right? Because

$$a^m\;\text{mod}\;m\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;a^{m-1}\cdot a=1\cdot a=a\mod{m}$$

must be true for FLT to hold.

Since now we know that $a^{m-1}\;\text{mod}\;m=1$, and we need that mod equation in the form $ax=1\;\text{mod}\;m$, we just do

$$a^{m-1}=1\;\;\text{mod}\;m\;\;\;\Rightarrow\;\;\;a\cdot a^{m-2}=1\;\text{mod}\;m$$

Thus, the **mulplicative inverse of `a` in mod `m` is**

$$a^{-1}=a^{m-2}\;\text{mod}\;m,\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;m\;\;\text{is prime},\;\;a\neq 0$$

This brings us to our next topic: how to quickly exponentiate a number in mod `m`.

#### Exponentiation by Squaring
The code below has plenty of comments describing how it works. It pretty much commutes $a^p\;\text{mod}\;m$:

```typescript
// x^9 =
//    a = x^4
//        b = x^2
//            c = x -> return x
//        -> return c * c (equiv to x * x)
//    -> return b * b (equiv to x^2 * x^2)
// -> return a * a * x (equiv to x^4 * x^4 * x = x^9)

// Another way to look at it:
//      x^9 = x^4 * x^4 * x
//      x^4 is calculated the same way: x^2 * x^2
const modExp = (base: bigint, power: bigint, mod: bigint): bigint => {
    if (power === 0n)
        return 1n;
    if (power === 1n)
        return base % mod;
    let result = modExp(base, power >> 1n, mod); // power = Math.floor(power / 2)
    result = (result * result) % mod;

    // if power is odd, multiply it with base. E.g., 5^3 = 5^2 x 5^1.
    // 5^2 is taken care of from the recursion
    if ((power & 1n) === 1n)
        result = (result * base) % mod;

    return result;
};
```

An iterative solution would be as follows:

```typescript
const modExp = (base: bigint, power: bigint, mod: bigint) => {
    let ans = 1n;

    while (power > 0n) {
        // if odd
        if ((power & 1n) === 1n)
            ans = (ans * base) % mod;

        power = power >> 1n; // Math.floor(power / 2)
        base = (base * base) % mod;
    }
    // even if power is like 4, power will eventually become 1, in which case
    // ans = (1 * base^4) % mod, and that'll get returned
    return ans;
};
```

#### Intro Conclusion
We now have the modulo field! I.e., $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ field.
* The $\mathbb{Z}$ stands for all positive and negative integers ($\mathbb{R}$ is all real numbers, $\mathbb{Q}$ is all rational numbers, and $\mathbb{N}$ is all natural numbers (1,2,...,inf).
* A **field** is just a fancy term from abstract algebra theory for a set with the four basic operators (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) defined in a way that works just like you've learned in high-school for the rational and real numbers (however division by zero is still undefined).
* Thus,  $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ is a fancy term meaning the set of integers from `0` to `p-1` treated as residues modulo `p`.

This also means algebra works much like the way you learned in highschool. How do you solve $3=4x+5\mod{7}$? Pretend `x` is a real number to get $x=-1/2=-1\cdot 2^{-1}\mod{7}$