# Day 17 - Conway Cubes - [Part 1](17.ts) [Part2](17b.ts)

As your flight slowly drifts through the sky, the Elves at the Mythical
Information Bureau at the North Pole contact you. They'd like some help
debugging a malfunctioning experimental energy source aboard one of their
super-secret imaging satellites.

The experimental energy source is based on cutting-edge technology: a set of
Conway Cubes contained in a pocket dimension! When you hear it's having
problems, you can't help but agree to take a look.

The pocket dimension contains an infinite 3-dimensional grid. At every integer
3-dimensional coordinate (x,y,z), there exists a single cube which is either
**active or inactive**.

In the initial state of the pocket dimension, almost all cubes start
**inactive**. The only exception to this is a small flat region of cubes (your
puzzle input); the cubes in this region start in the specified **active** (`#`)
or **inactive** (`.`) state.

The energy source then proceeds to boot up by executing **six cycles**.

Each cube only ever considers its **neighbors**: any of the 26 other cubes where
any of their coordinates differ by at most 1. For example, given the cube at
`x=1,y=2,z=3`, its neighbors include the cube at `x=2,y=2,z=2`, the cube at
`x=0,y=2,z=3`, and so on.

During a cycle, **all** cubes **simultaneously** change their state according to
the following rules:

- If a cube is **active** and **exactly 2 or 3** of its neighbors are also
  active, the cube remains **active**. Otherwise, the cube becomes **inactive**.
- If a cube is **inactive** but **exactly 3** of its neighbors are active, the
  cube becomes active. Otherwise, the cube remains **inactive**.

The engineers responsible for this experimental energy source would like you to
simulate the pocket dimension and determine what the configuration of cubes
should be at the end of the six-cycle boot process.

For example, consider the following initial state:

```
.#.
..#
###
```

Even though the pocket dimension is 3-dimensional, this initial state represents
a small 2-dimensional slice of it. (In particular, this initial state defines a
3x3x1 region of the 3-dimensional space.)

Simulating a few cycles from this initial state produces the following
configurations, where the result of each cycle is shown layer-by-layer at each
given z coordinate (and the frame of view follows the active cells in each
cycle):

```
Before any cycles:

z=0
.#.
..#
###


After 1 cycle:

z=-1
#..
..#
.#.

z=0
#.#
.##
.#.

z=1
#..
..#
.#.


After 2 cycles:

z=-2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....

z=-1
..#..
.#..#
....#
.#...
.....

z=0
##...
##...
#....
....#
.###.

z=1
..#..
.#..#
....#
.#...
.....

z=2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....


After 3 cycles:

z=-2
.......
.......
..##...
..###..
.......
.......
.......

z=-1
..#....
...#...
#......
.....##
.#...#.
..#.#..
...#...

z=0
...#...
.......
#......
.......
.....##
.##.#..
...#...

z=1
..#....
...#...
#......
.....##
.#...#.
..#.#..
...#...

z=2
.......
.......
..##...
..###..
.......
.......
.......
```

After the full six-cycle boot process completes, **112** cubes are left in the
**active** state.

Starting with your given initial configuration, simulate six cycles. **How many
cubes are left in the active state after the sixth cycle?**

Your puzzle answer was 333.

## Part Two

For some reason, your simulated results don't match what the experimental energy
source engineers expected. Apparently, the pocket dimension actually has **four
spatial dimensions**, not three.

The pocket dimension contains an infinite 4-dimensional grid. At every integer
4-dimensional coordinate `(x,y,z,w)`, there exists a single cube (really, a
hypercube) which is still either **active** or **inactive**.

Each cube only ever considers its **neighbors**: any of the **80** other cubes
where any of their coordinates differ by at most `1`. For example, given the
cube at `x=1,y=2,z=3,w=4`, its neighbors include the cube at `x=2,y=2,z=3,w=3`,
the cube at `x=0,y=2,z=3,w=4`, and so on.

The initial state of the pocket dimension still consists of a small flat region
of cubes. Furthermore, the same rules for cycle updating still apply: during
each cycle, consider the **number of active neighbors** of each cube.

For example, consider the same initial state as in the example above. Even
though the pocket dimension is 4-dimensional, this initial state represents a
small 2-dimensional slice of it. (In particular, this initial state defines a
3x3x1x1 region of the 4-dimensional space.)

Simulating a few cycles from this initial state produces the following
configurations, where the result of each cycle is shown layer-by-layer at each
given `z` and `w` coordinate:

```
Before any cycles:

z=0, w=0
.#.
..#
###


After 1 cycle:

z=-1, w=-1
#..
..#
.#.

z=0, w=-1
#..
..#
.#.

z=1, w=-1
#..
..#
.#.

z=-1, w=0
#..
..#
.#.

z=0, w=0
#.#
.##
.#.

z=1, w=0
#..
..#
.#.

z=-1, w=1
#..
..#
.#.

z=0, w=1
#..
..#
.#.

z=1, w=1
#..
..#
.#.


After 2 cycles:

z=-2, w=-2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....

z=-1, w=-2
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=0, w=-2
###..
##.##
#...#
.#..#
.###.

z=1, w=-2
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=2, w=-2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....

z=-2, w=-1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=-1, w=-1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=0, w=-1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=1, w=-1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=2, w=-1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=-2, w=0
###..
##.##
#...#
.#..#
.###.

z=-1, w=0
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=0, w=0
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=1, w=0
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=2, w=0
###..
##.##
#...#
.#..#
.###.

z=-2, w=1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=-1, w=1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=0, w=1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=1, w=1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=2, w=1
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=-2, w=2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....

z=-1, w=2
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=0, w=2
###..
##.##
#...#
.#..#
.###.

z=1, w=2
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....

z=2, w=2
.....
.....
..#..
.....
.....
```

After the full six-cycle boot process completes, **848** cubes are left in the **active** state.

Starting with your given initial configuration, simulate six cycles in a
4-dimensional space. **How many cubes are left in the active state after the
sixth cycle?**

## Solution

This problem became a good excuse to implement some fundamental data structures
like [ArrayDeque](../util/ArrayDeque.ts) and
[InfiniteGrid](../util/InfiniteGrid.ts).

For Part One, I represented the grid with a three-dimensional `Deque` because I
need the ability to add to the front and back of a list in constant `O(1)` time.
When benchmarking Javascript's `unshift()`, it was much slower than `pop()`,
implying that the nodeJS engine was moving elements around when doing `unshift()`.

What complicated this solution is my attempt to optimize when to add another
plane, or another line on top of all the existing planes, or another line below,
or adding a new point to each of the existing lines in forward or backward
direction, which I needed to do before every cycle.

This was already unweildy, so I didn't want to entertain this solution for a 4D
space.

### Part Two Solution

Using a `Map` to store all the active points and calling it an `InfiniteGrid`
wasn't all that interesting. What was interesting and invaluable was storing the min and max
of each dimension. Since each dimension can be treated independent of the other
dimensions, when we need to scan outisde of the given vectors, we can scan from `min

- 1`in every dimension to`max + 1` in every dimension.

E.g., when the following vectors are added to our grid:

```
[1,1]
[1,5]
[2,3]
[0,4]
```

The bounds for the first component are `0` to `2`, and for the second component
`1` to `5`, giving us a rectangle with corners:

```
[0,5]  x   [2,5]
  x
             x

[0,1]  x   [2,1]
```

Where `x` are the actual points in our vector space.

This is not as performant as part one solution, since part one only expanded in
a specific direction if it needed to, and this solution always scans one unit
outside of the `[min, max]` of every dimension.

### Getting Neighbors

The usual way of getting neighbors for `(x, y, z, w)` is to do a `for-loop` on
every dimension, centered around `(x, y, z, w)`. One more thing you can do is do
`getPermutations` of `[-1, 0 ,1]` of length `4`, or however many dimensions you
want. If you use a length of `2`, you'd get `[[-1, -1], ..., [1,1]]`, a total of
`3^2` elements.

Once you have those `3^4 = 81` permutations, you map all of those by adding `(x, y, z, w)` to 'em, and you're done!.

```typescript
/**
 * An input of ([-1, 0], 3) would return 2^3 = 8 results of length 3. Some
 * permutations include: [-1, -1, -1], [-1, -1, 0], [-1, 0, -1], etc.
 * @param fromSet the numbers you want to permute.
 * @param length How long each result should be.
 * @return An array of permutations of length given by fromSet.length ^ length,
 * where each permutation is of length `lenth`.
 */
export function getPermutations(fromSet: number[], length: number): number[][] {
  const result: number[][] = [];
  // bactracking algorithm.
  const helper = (workingSet: number[]) => {
    if (workingSet.length === length) {
      result.push([...workingSet]);
      return;
    }
    for (const item of fromSet) {
      workingSet.push(item);
      helper(workingSet);
      workingSet.pop();
    }
  };
  helper([]);
  return result;
}
```

We can use the same technique to get all vector points within the `[min, max]`
of every dimension:

```typescript
/**
 * Gets all possible integer vectors from startVector to endVector.
 * E.g., [-2, 1] to [0, 2] would return things like [-2,1], [-2,2], [-1,1],
 * [-1,2], [0,1], [0, 2].
 * Note that your vector can be more than 2D. [-10, -5, 0, -10, 2] to [0, 0, 0,
 * 0, 0] is valid.
 */
export function getSpace(startVector: number[], endVector: number[]) {
  assert(startVector.length === endVector.length);
  assert(endVector.every((e, idx) => e >= startVector[idx]));

  const result: number[][] = [];
  const helper = (workingVector: number[]) => {
    if (workingVector.length === startVector.length) {
      result.push([...workingVector]);
      return;
    }
    const nextIdx = workingVector.length;
    const start = startVector[nextIdx];
    const end = endVector[nextIdx];
    for (let i = start; i <= end; i++) {
      workingVector.push(i);
      helper(workingVector);
      workingVector.pop();
    }
  };
  helper([]);
  return result;
}
```

Finally, we can even make this a Generator so that a consumer of the
`InfiniteGrid` can easily iterate through all the points, like so:

```typescript
/**
 * @param entireGrid When set, it will traverse the entire grid within the
 * boundaries of the grid. So if the grid has [-4,1], [10, 5], [6, 7], it will
 * traverse the rectangle defined between y=1, y=7 and x=-4, x=10.
 * @param expandBy When `entireGrid` is provided, you have the option to
 * traverse outer in every dimension by the given `expandBy`.
 */
*entries(
  entireGrid = false,
  expandBy = 0
): IterableIterator<[number[], T | undefined]> {
  if (entireGrid) {
    // eslint-disable-next-line
    const thisGrid = this;
    // see the non-generator version of this: src/util/getSpace().
    const startVector = this.boundaries.map((b) => b.min - expandBy);
    const endVector = this.boundaries.map((b) => b.max + expandBy);

    // eslint-disable-next-line
    function* helper(
      workingVector: number[]
    ): Generator<[number[], T | undefined]> {
      if (workingVector.length === startVector.length) {
        yield [[...workingVector], thisGrid.get(workingVector)];
      } else {
        const nextIdx = workingVector.length;
        const start = startVector[nextIdx];
        const end = endVector[nextIdx];
        for (let i = start; i <= end; i++) {
          workingVector.push(i);
          yield* helper(workingVector);
          workingVector.pop();
        }
        return;
      }
    }
    yield* helper([]);
  } else {
    for (const [key, val] of this.vectors.entries()) {
      yield [this.toVector(key), val];
    }
  }
}
```

#### Future Improvements

Part Two takes around **2.5 seconds** to execute, because it scans the entire
space bounded by the min/max of every dimension. E.g., if you had the vectors
`[-500, 1]` and `[500, 200]` in there, it would scan **200,000** points, when
really most of them won't ever become `active`.

Instead of scanning every single point within the space bounded by the
boundaries of the dimensions, we can scan only the added points (which are the
`active` points), and then each of their neighbors.

Something like this:

```typescript
getNextCycle(): PocketDimension {
  const newGrid = new InfiniteGrid<boolean>(4);
  const scanned = new GenericSet<number[]>((v) => v.join(','));
  // will only scan vectors that were actually set in the InfiniteGrid.
  for (const [vector, isActive] of this.grid.entries()) {
    const [x, y, z, w] = vector;
    if (isActive) {
      this.updatePointOnNewGrid(vector, newGrid);
      const neighbors = this.neighborsOffset.map(([xo, yo, zo, wo]) => [
        x + xo,
        y + yo,
        z + zo,
        w + wo,
      ]);
      // scan its neighbors too, even if they're inactive.
      for (const neighbor of neighbors) {
        if (!scanned.has(neighbor)) {
          this.updatePointOnNewGrid(neighbor, newGrid);
          scanned.add(neighbor);
        }
      }
    }
  }
  return new PocketDimension(newGrid);
}
```

This reduced the runtime to **1.5 seconds**. Not great, not terrible.
