# Day 21 Allergen Assessment - [Part1/2](21.ts) & [Python LP!](21_solver.py)

Consider an input like this:

```
mxmxvkd kfcds sqjhc nhms (contains dairy, fish)
trh fvjkl sbzzf mxmxvkd (contains dairy)
sqjhc fvjkl (contains soy)
sqjhc mxmxvkd sbzzf (contains fish)
```

Which is a list of ingredients like `mxmxvkd` followed by a list of allergens
that the list of ingredients can have.

The first food in the list has four ingredients (written in a language you don't
understand): `mxmxvkd`, `kfcds`, `sqjhc`, and `nhms`. While the food might
contain other allergens, a few allergens the food definitely contains are listed
afterward: `dairy` and `fish`.

## Part 1

The first step is to determine which ingredients **can't possibly** contain any of
the allergens in any food in your list. In the above example, none of the
ingredients `kfcds`, `nhms`, `sbzzf`, or `trh` can contain an allergen. Counting the
number of times any of these ingredients appear in any ingredients list produces
**5**: they all appear once each except `sbzzf`, which appears twice.

Determine which ingredients cannot possibly contain any of the allergens in your
list. **How many times do any of those ingredients appear?**

## Part 2

Now that you've isolated the inert ingredients, you should have enough
information to figure out which ingredient contains which allergen.

In the above example:

- mxmxvkd contains dairy.
- sqjhc contains fish.
- fvjkl contains soy.

Arrange the ingredients alphabetically by their allergen and separate them by
commas to produce your canonical dangerous ingredient list. (There should not be
any spaces in your canonical dangerous ingredient list.) In the above example,
this would be **mxmxvkd,sqjhc,fvjkl**.

## Solution

### Greedy algorithm via frequency counter

1. For each allergen, store how often each ingredient appears. This will be a
   `Map<Allergen, Map<Ingredient, number>>`.
2. An ingredient like `mx` may have a count of `2` for allergen `dairy`, whereas
   `kf` may only have a count of `1` for `dairy`. We assume that `kf` cannot be
   the ingredient that has the `dairy` allergen.
   - We end up with a `Map<Allergen, Set<Ingredient>>` because we've eliminated
     all ingredients that don't have the max frequency. Now there might be this
     in the Map: `dairy -> [mx, sf]` implying that the ingredient both had the
     max and the same number of times `dairy` listed in the list next to them.
3. For part 1, we iterate through the `Map<Allergen, Set<Ingredient>>`, union
   all the `Set<Ingredient>` into a single `Set` which will consist of
   ingredients that have an allergen. Call this set `A`. Then we just do
   `difference(allIngredients, A)`, which will return ingredients that
   definitely do not have any allergens.
4. For part 2, we first look at the allergen that has the fewest potential
   ingredients. **There must exist an allergen with only potential
   ingredient.**. Say this ingredient is `mx` and allergen is `dairy`. We can
   now conclude that `mx` has `dairy`, and eliminate `mx` from ALL the
   allergens' potential ingredients.
5. There must now AGAIN **exist an allergen with only one potential
   ingredient** after we removed `mx`. We keep doing this until we're all done!

You can even do part 2 by hand. There are 8 ingredients and 8 allergens after
part 1 is done.

The code is well documented. Go check it out [here](21.md).

### Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP) - Integer Programming using Python

#### Installation

Install [PuLP](https://coin-or.github.io/pulp/index.html):

```
pip3 install --user pulp
```

Optionally, install [GLPK](https://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/):

```
brew install glpk
glpsol --version
```

If you decide not to use GLPK as your solver, change the following line:

```python
model.solve(solver=GLPK(msg=False))
```

to

```python
model.solve()
```

Optionally, install [nodemon](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon):

```
npm install nodemon -g
```

This will allow you to run a watcher on your Python changes:

```
nodemon --exec python3 21_solver.py
```

#### Prerequisites

I used [this guide](https://realpython.com/linear-programming-python/) to get
familiar with `PuLP`. See files [playground1](21_playground.py) and
[playground2](21_playground2.py) for basic demos.

#### Integer programming formulation

##### Parameters

- $I$ - set of all ingredients
- $A$ - set of all allergens

##### Indices

- $i\in I$ - a specific ingredient
- $a\in A$ - a specific allergen

##### Variable

$$
\begin{flalign}
& X_{ai} = \left\lbrace\matrix{1&\text{if ingredient i has allergen a} \cr 0&\text{otherwise}}\right. &
\end{flalign}
$$

##### Objective

No objective for this. We'll use the default of `LpMaximize`.

##### Constraints

1.  A given allergen must exist in one and only one ingredient.
    $$\forall_a \space\space\space\space\space\space\space \sum_{i \in I}{X_{ia}} = 1$$
2.  An ingredient can have at most one allergen.
    $$\forall_i \space\space\space\space\space\space\space \sum_{a\in A}{X_{ia}} <= 1$$
3.  The input of food lines are constraints. E.g., the line
    ```
    mx kf sq (contains dairy, fish)
    ```
    translates to

$$X_{mx,d} + X_{kf,d} + X_{sq,d} + X_{mx,f} + X_{kf,f} + X_{sq,f} = 2$$

It equals `2` because exactly two of those variables must be true. I.e., one of those ingredients must have dairy, and another must have fish.

##### Code

The code can be found [here](../../python/2020/21_solver.py).
