# Day 9b - Encoding Error - [Code](9b.ts)

## Part One

You're given two inputs: a **preamble: number** and a long array of data
**xmasData: number[]**. For your main input, the `preamble` is `25`.

The first `25` numbers in `xmasData` are some arbitrary positive integers. After
that, each number you receive should be teh sum of any two of the `25` immediately
previous numbers. The two numbers will have different values, and there might be
more than one such pair.

For example, suppose your preamble consists of the numbers `1` through `25`
(this won't be the case for your input. They'll be arbitrary numbers without any
order). For `xmasData` to be valid, the next number must be teh sum of two of
those numbers:

- `26` would be a **valid** next number, as it could be 1 plus 25 (or many other pairs, like 2 and 24).
- `49` would be a **valid** next number, as it is the sum of 24 and 25.
- `100` would **not** be valid; no two of the previous 25 numbers sum to 100.
- `50` would also **not** be valid; although 25 appears in the previous 25 numbers, the two numbers in the pair must be different.

Suppose the 26th number is `45`, and the first number (no longer an option, as it is more than 25 numbers ago) was `20`. Now, for the next number to be valid, there needs to be some pair of numbers among `1-19`, `21-25`, or `45` that add up to it so fix your self?

- `26` would still be a **valid** next number, as 1 and 25 are still within the previous 25 numbers.
- `65` would **not** be valid, as no two of the available numbers sum to it.
- `64` and `66` would both be **valid**, as they are the result of `19+45` and `21+45` respectively.

Here is a larger example which only considers the previous `5` numbers (and has a preamble of length `5`):

```
35
20
15
25
47
40
62
55
65
95
102
117
150
182
127
219
299
277
309
576
```

In this example, after the 5-number preamble, almost every number is the sum of two of the previous 5 numbers; the only number that does not follow this rule is **127**.

The first step of attacking the weakness in the XMAS data is to find the first number in the list (after the preamble) which is **not** the sum of two of the `25` numbers before it. **What is the first number that does not have this property?**

### Solution

We're not interested in the solution for this for this doc. The solution can be
done O(n) by having a `Set` that adds as you iterate through the array and look
for the complemetn value in the `Set`. See [Day 1](1.ts) for an example.

## Part Two

The final step in breaking the XMAS encryption relies on the invalid number you
just found: you must **find a contiguous set of at least two numbers** in your
list which sum to the invalid number from step 1.

Again consider the above example:

```
35
20
15*
25*
47*
40*
62
55
65
95
102
117
150
182
127
219
299
277
309
576
```

In this list, adding up all of the numbers from `15` through `40` produces the invalid number from step 1, `127`. (Of course, the contiguous set of numbers in your actual list might be much longer.)

To find the encryption weakness, add together the **smallest** and **largest** number in this contiguous range; in this example, these are `15` and `47`, producing `62`.

**What is the encryption weakness in your XMAS-encrypted list of numbers?**

### Solution

You can get a contiguous sum in an array by converting that array to a
cumulative sum. If an array is `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]`, its cumulative sum array would be
`[1, 3, 6, 10, 15]`.

Nwo to get a contiguous sum of `[2, 3, 4]` from the original array above, so
`index` of `[1, 3]`, you can do `cumulativeSum[3] - cumulativeSum[0]`.

We're trying to find a continguous sum that adds up to `X`, where `X` is equal
to:

```
X = cumulativeSum[j] - cumulativeSum[i] = sum(originalArray[i...j])
```

We can use the technique from Part One to keep a working set `workingSet` going as we iterate through
`cumulativeSum`.

At some index `j` in `cumulativeSum`, if there exists a value equal to
`cumulativeSum[j] - X` in the `workingSet`, then we know that this equation
holds true because:

```
X = cumulativeSum[j] - cumulativeSum[i]
is equivalent to
X - cumulativeSum[i] = cumulativeSum[j]
```

In code, this gives us:

```typescript
function findContiguousSum({ sumTo, xmasData }: SimulationPartB): number[] {
  // we don't need to iterate through the entire xmasData, just until the index
  // where the invalidNumber (or sumTo) is.
  const idx = assert(
    xmasData.findIndex((d) => d === sumTo),
    (idx) => idx > -1
  );
  const cumulativeSum = xmasData
    .slice(0, idx + 1)
    .reduce(
      (cumSum, curr) => {
        cumSum.push(cumSum[cumSum.length - 1] + curr);
        return cumSum;
      },
      [0] // add an artificial 0, that we remove after the reduce.
    )
    .slice(1); // remove the first element, which is 0.

  const workingSet = new Map<number, number>(); // cumSum[i] -> i
  for (let i = 0; i < cumulativeSum.length; i++) {
    if (workingSet.has(cumulativeSum[i] - sumTo)) {
      return xmasData.slice(
        workingSet.get(cumulativeSum[i] - sumTo)! + 1,
        i + 1
      );
    }
    workingSet.set(cumulativeSum[i], i);
  }
  throw new Error('No contiguous sum found.');
}
```
